Java is a high-level, general-purpose, object-oriented, and secure programming language developed by James Gosling at Sun Microsystems, 
Inc. in 1991. It is formally known as OAK. In 1995, Sun Microsystem changed the name to Java. In 2009, Sun Microsystem takeover by Oracle Corporation.

 There are three editions of Java:

Java Standard Editions (JSE): It is used to create programs for a desktop computer.
Java Enterprise Edition (JEE): It is used to create large programs that run on the server and manages heavy traffic and complex transactions.
Java Micro Edition (JME): It is used to develop applications for small devices such as set-top boxes, phone, and appliances.
Types of Java Applications
There are four types of Java applications that can be created using Java programming:

Standalone Applications: Java standalone applications uses GUI components such as AWT, Swing, and JavaFX. These components contain buttons, list, menu, scroll panel, etc. It is also known as desktop alienations.
Enterprise Applications: An application which is distributed in nature is called enterprise applications.
Web Applications: An applications that run on the server is called web applications. We use JSP, Servlet, Spring, and Hibernate technologies for creating web applications.
Mobile Applications: Java ME is a cross-platform to develop mobile applications which run across smartphones. Java is a platform for App Development in Android.
Java Platform
Java Platform is a collection of programs. It helps to develop and run a program written in the Java programming language. Java Platform includes an execution engine, a compiler and set of libraries. Java is a platform-independent language.



Features of Java
Simple: Java is a simple language because its syntax is simple, clean, and easy to understand. Complex and ambiguous concepts of C++ are either eliminated or re-implemented in Java. For example, pointer and operator overloading are not used in Java.
Object-Oriented: In Java, everything is in the form of the object. It means it has some data and behavior. A program must have at least one class and object.
Robust: Java makes an effort to check error at run time and compile time. It uses a strong memory management system called garbage collector. Exception handling and garbage collection features make it strong.
Secure: Java is a secure programming language because it has no explicit pointer and programs runs in the virtual machine. Java contains a security manager that defines the access of Java classes.
Platform-Independent: Java provides a guarantee that code writes once and run anywhere. This byte code is platform-independent and can be run on any machine.
